---
title: " VLAN "
date: " 2024-02-18 18:20:09 "
categories: "networking"
image: "/assets/network/network_cable.jpg"
tags: devops, networking
permalink: "/:categories/:title.html"
---
The VLAN (**Virtual Local Area Network**) is where the computers, servers and other network devices are connected with each other **logically** regardless of where they are physically present.

The purpose of a VLAN is for *improved security, traffic management (**isolation of traffic**) and better use of available ports in the switch etc..*. 

VLAN help us to divide our network into smaller network broadcast domains by doing so it helps us to avoid the unnecessary broadcast messages from all devices. ( *These broadcast traffic might slow down our network* )

Do note, that only interfaces of part of the same VLAN can communicate with each other. 

Out of the box most of the network devices including Cisco has 1 default VLAN ( *Every interface are attached to VLAN 1, so they can communicate with each other* ) and support 4094 VLAN's per switch.  VLANs from 1006 to 4094 are called **Extended VLANs**.

VLAN's are not restricted to one switch we can have the same VLAN in another switch ( *Scalable* ) as well and communication between them is possible.

There are two types of ports in a Switch,

- **Access port**, 
- **Trunk port.**

When a port (interface, basically used by endpoints) is assigned to a VLAN it becomes a access port.  Whereas a Trunk port transports traffic from different VLAN's, so when data is transferred from switch A to switch B via the trunk port the switch adds a **Tag** along with the data, this **Tag** is then used by the switch B to identify to which VLAN the data is been sent from and where to be received at.

The Tag is called a ***802.1q*** or ***dot1q***  (4 byte of data), so it basically contains **TPID (this used to identify the packet as a dot1q packet) & TCI ( Tag Control Information  - 3 bits of info such as priority, DEI (Drop eligible indicator), VLAN ID)**. 

This above Tag is read and removed by the receiving switch. 

#### Can we transfer traffic between VLAN's in the same switch ? 

Not with a Layer 2 switch but Yes, if we have a Layer 3 switch data can be routed between the VLAN, or we could make use of a router to do the same. 

eg. **Router on a stick** setup.

##### View available VLANs in a Cisco switch: 

```bash
# show vlan brief 
```
##### Create a VLAN: 

```bash 
# config terminal 
# vlan 100      (vlan num)
# name sales    (give a name to your vlan)
# exit 
```
##### Add port to a VLAN: 

```bash 
# conf terminal
# interface g0/1                  (goto the interface)
# switchport access vlan 100      (to which vlan we want this port to be part of)
# end 

For a range of Interfaces

# config terminal 
# interface range g0/2-8
# switchport mode access        (this specifically tells that port is used as a access port)
# switchport access vlan 100 
# end 
```
##### Delete a VLAN:

> Caution - we got to make sure that no port is part of the VLAN which we gonna remove, else remove the ports from the VLAN and then remove it. 
> Lets say we removed the VLAN with a interface in it, in that case that interface wont be showing up in the "show vlan brief" command output, as a fix go to that interface and add it to VLAN 1. 

```bash 
# no vlan 100 
```

##### Remove VLAN database:

```bash 
# show flash 
> /

# delete flash:vlan.dat
> y
```

##### How to make a port as Trunk port ? 

```bash
# conf t 
# int g0/1
# switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q
# switchport mode trunk
# end

To view the trunk port status 

# sh interface trunk
```

### Native VLAN

It's comes into picture when devices connected to a trunk link do not tag their traffic with VLAN information. Native VLAN is the VLAN to which untagged traffic on a trunk link is assigned to.

By default, the native VLAN is VLAN 1. So throughout the process from Endpoint 1 to Switch 1 and Switch 2 and then Endpoint 2, the frame is not tagged by the switches.

#### Why we use this ? 

Hubs don't understand or can't create tags, in that case this can be helpful Also it's used by Admins to manage their network devices.

> Changing the Native VLAN to a different number is always required because it poses as a security threat to our network.


###### Important thing to note: 

When we are using trunk and trying to establish connection between servers part of same VLAN separated across few switches, then we got to make sure that each switch in between should atleast have VLAN exist in it so that data can be transferred through it. If the VLAN doesn't exist in a switch between the two servers then the data will be dropped. 

